This episode dives into some of the most important data science libraries from the Python space
with one of its pioneers, Wes McKinney.
He's the creator or co-creator of the pandas Apache Arrow and Evus projects, as well as
an entrepreneur in this space.
This is Talk Python to Me, episode 462, recorded April 11th, 2024.
Are you ready for your host, Darius?
You're listening to Michael Kennedy on Talk Python to Me.
Live from Portland, Oregon, and this segment was made with Python.
Welcome to Talk Python to Me, a weekly podcast on Python.
This is your host, Michael Kennedy.
Follow me on Mastodon, where I'm @mkennedy, and follow the podcast using @talkpython,
both on fosstodon.org.
Keep up with the show and listen to over seven years of past episodes at talkpython.fm.
We've started streaming most of our episodes live on YouTube.
Subscribe to our YouTube channel over at talkpython.fm/youtube to get notified about upcoming shows and
be part of that episode.
This episode is sponsored by Neo4j.
It's time to stop asking relational databases to do more than they were made for and simplify
complex data models with graphs.
Check out the sample FastAPI project and see what Neo4j, a native graph database, can do
for you.
Find out more at talkpython.fm/neo4j.
And it's brought to you by Mailtrap, an email delivery platform that developers love.
Try for free at mailtrap.io.
Hey, Wes, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
Thanks for having me.
You know, honestly, I feel like it's been a long time coming having you on the show.
You've had such a big impact in the Python space, especially the data science side of
that space, and it's high time to have you on the show.
So welcome.
Good to have you.
Yeah, it's great to be here.
I've been heads down a lot the last, you know, last n years.
And I actually haven't been, because I think a lot of my work has been more like data infrastructure
and working at even a lower level than Python.
So I haven't been as engaging as much directly with the Python community.
But it's been great to kind of get back more involved and start catching up on all the
things that people have been building.
And being at Posit gives me the ability to, yeah, sort of have more exposure to what's
going on and people that are using Python in the real world.
There's a ton of stuff going on at Posit that's super interesting.
And we'll talk about some of that.
And, you know, it's sometimes it's just really fun to build, you know, and work with people
building things.
And I'm sure you're enjoying that aspect of it.
For sure.
Nice.
Well, before we dive into pandas and all the things that you've been working on after that,
you know, let's just hear a quick bit about yourself for folks who don't know you.
Sure.
Yeah.
So I grew up in Akron, Ohio, mostly.
And I got involved, started getting involved in Python development around 2007, 2008.
And built, I was working in quant finance at the time, I started building a personal
data analysis toolkit that turned into the pandas project.
And then open source that in 2009, started getting involved in the Python community.
And I spent several years like writing my book, Python for Data Analysis, and then working
with the broader scientific Python, Python data science community to help enable Python
to become a mainstream programming language for doing data analysis and data science.
In the meantime, I've become an entrepreneur, I've started some companies and I've been
working to innovate and improve the computing infrastructure that powers data science tools
and libraries like pandas.
So that's led to some other projects like Apache Arrow and IBIS and some other things.
Recent years, I've been worked on a startup, Voltron Data, which is still very much going
strong and has a big team and is off to the races.
And I've had a long relationship with Posit, formerly RStudio.
And they were my home for doing Arrow development from 2018 to 2020.
They helped me incubate the startup that became Voltron Data.
And so I've gone back to work full time there as a software architect to help them with
their Python strategy to make sort of their data science platform a delight to use for
the Python user base.
I'm pretty impressed with what they're doing.
I didn't realize the connection between Voltron and Posit, but I have had Joe Chung on the
show before to talk about Shiny for Python.
And I've seen him demo a few really interesting things, how it integrates to notebooks these
days, some of the stuff that you all are doing.
And yeah, it's just it's fascinating.
Can you give people a quick elevator pitch on that while we're on that subject?
On Shiny or on Posit in general?
Yeah, whichever you feel like.
Yeah, so Posit started out 2009 as RStudio.
And so it didn't start out intending to be a company.
JJ Allaire and Joe Chang built a new IDE, integrated development environment for R,
because what was available at the time wasn't great.
And so they made that into, I think, probably one of the best data science IDEs that's ever
been built.
It's really an amazing piece of tech.
So it started becoming a company with customers and revenue in the 2013 timeframe.
And they've built a whole suite of tools to support enterprise data science teams to make
open source data science work in the real world.
But the company itself, it's a certified B corporation, has no plans to go public or
IPO.
It is dedicated to the mission of open source software for data science and technical communication,
and is basically building itself to be a hundred year company that has a revenue generating
enterprise product side and an open source side so that the open source feeds the enterprise
part of the business.
The enterprise part of the business generates revenue to support the open source development.
And the goal is to be able to sustainably support the mission of open source data science
for, hopefully, the rest of our lives.
And it's an amazing company.
It's been one of the most successful companies that dedicates a large fraction of its engineering,
time to open source software development.
So it's very impressed with the company and JJ Allaire, its founder.
And I'm excited to be helping it grow and become a sustainable long-term fixture in
the ecosystem.
Yes.
Yeah, it's definitely doing cool stuff.
Incentives are aligned well, right?
It's not private equity or IPO.
Many people know JJ Allaire created ColdFusion, which is like the original dynamic web development
framework in the 1990s.
And so he and his brother, Jeremy, and some others built Allaire Corp to commercialize
ColdFusion.
And they built a successful software business that was acquired by Macromedia, which was
eventually acquired by Adobe.
But they did go public as Allaire Corp during the dot-com bubble.
And JJ went on to found a couple of other successful startups.
And so he found himself in his late 30s 15 years ago, or around age 40, around the age
I am now, having been very successful as an entrepreneur, no need to make money, and looking
for a mission to spend the rest of his career on.
And that identifying data science and statistical computing as an open source, in particular,
making open source for data science work, was the mission that he aligned with and something
that he had been interested in earlier in his career.
But he had gotten busy with other things.
So it's really refreshing to work with people who are really mission focused and focused
on making impact in the world, creating great software, empowering people, increasing accessibility,
and making most of it available for free on the internet, and not being so focused on
empire building and producing great profits for venture investors and things like that.
So I think the goal of the company is to provide an amazing home for top-tier software developers.
To work on this software, to spend their careers, and to build families, and to be a happy and
healthy culture for working on this type of software.
That sounds excellent.
Very cool.
I didn't realize the history all the way back to ColdFusion.
Speaking of history, let's jump in.
Wes, there's a possibility that people out there listening don't know what Pandas is.
You would think it's pretty ubiquitous, and I certainly would say that it is, especially
in the data science space.
I got a bunch of listeners who listen and they say really surprising things.
They'll say stuff to me like, "Michael, I've been listening for six weeks now and I'm starting
to understand some of the stuff you all are talking about."
I'm like, "Why did you listen for six weeks?
You didn't know what I was talking about.
That's crazy."
And a lot of people use it as language immersion to get into the Python space.
So I'm sure there's plenty of people out there who are immersing themselves but are pretty
new.
So maybe for that crew, we could introduce what Pandas is to them.
Absolutely.
So this is the Data Manipulation and Analysis Toolkit for Python.
So it's a Python library that you install that enables you to read data files.
So read many different types of data files off of disk or off of remote storage, or read
data out of a database or some other remote data storage system.
This is tabular data.
So it's structured data like with columns.
You can think of it like a spreadsheet or some other tabular data set.
And then it provides you with this DataFrame object, which is kind of pandas.DataFrame
that is the main tabular data object.
And it has a ton of methods for accessing, slicing, grabbing subsets of the data, applying
functions on it that do filtering and subsetting and selection, as well as more analytical
operations like things that you might do with a database system or SQL.
So joins and lookups, as well as analytical functions like summary statistics, grouping
by some key and producing summary statistics.
So it's basically a Swiss Army knife for doing data manipulation, data cleaning, and supporting
the data analysis workflow.
But it doesn't actually include very much as far as actual statistics or models.
Or if you're doing something with LLMs or linear regression, or some type of machine
learning, you have to use another library.
But pandas is the on-ramp for all of the data into your environment in Python.
So when people are building some kind of application that touches data in Python, pandas is often
like the initial on-ramp for how data gets into Python, where you clean up the data,
you regularize it, you get it ready for analysis, and then you feed the clean data into the
downstream statistical library or data analysis library that you're using.
- That whole data wrangling side of things, right?
- Yeah, that's right, that's right.
And so, you know, in some history, Python had arrays like matrices and what we call
tensors now, multi-dimensional arrays going back all the way to 1995, which is pretty
early history for Python.
Like the Python programming language has only been around since like 1990 or 1991, if my
memory serves.
But what became NumPy in 2005, 2006, started out as numeric in 1995, and it provided numerical
computing, multi-dimensional arrays, matrices, the kind of stuff that you might do in MATLAB,
but it was mainly focused on numerical computing and not with the type of business datasets
that you find in database systems, which contain a lot of strings or dates or non-numeric data.
And so my initial interest was I found Python to be a really productive programming language.
I really liked writing code in it, writing simple scripts, like, you know, doing random
things for my job.
But then you had this numerical computing library, NumPy, which enabled you to work
with large numeric arrays and large datasets with a single data type.
But working with this more tabular type data, stuff that you would do in Excel or stuff
that you do in a database, it wasn't very easy to do that with NumPy or it wasn't really
designed for that.
And so that's what led to building this, like, higher level library that deals with these
tabular datasets in the Pandas library, which was originally focused on, you know, building
really with a really close relationship with NumPy.
So Pandas itself was like a thin layer on top of NumPy originally.
This portion of Talk Python to Me is brought to you by Neo4j.
I have told you about Neo4j, the native graph database on previous AdSpots.
This time, I want to tell you about their relatively new podcast, Graph Stuff.
If you care about graph databases and modeling with graphs, you should definitely give it
a listen.
On their season finale last year, they talked about the intersection of LLMs and knowledge
graphs.
Remember when ChatGPT launched?
It felt like the LLM was a magical tool out of the toolbox.
However, the more you use it, the more you realize that's not the case.
The technology is brilliant, but it's prone to issues such as hallucinations.
But there's hope.
If you feed the LLM reliable current data, ground it in the right data and context, then
it can make the right connections and give the right answers.
On the episode, the team at Neo4j explores how to get the results by pairing LLMs with
knowledge graphs and vector search.
Check out their podcast episode on Graph Stuff.
They share tips for retrieval methods, prompt engineering, and more.
So just visit talkpython.fm/neo4j-graphstuff to listen to an episode.
That's talkpython.fm/neo4j-graphstuff.
The link is in your podcast players show notes.
Thank you to Neo4j for supporting Talk Python to me.
One thing I find interesting about Pandas is it's almost its own programming environment
these days in the sense that, you know, traditional Python, we do a lot of loops, we do a lot
of attribute dereferencing, function calling, and a lot of what happens in Pandas is more
functional.
It's more applied to us.
It's almost like set operations, right?
And a lot of vector operations and so on.
Yeah, that was behavior that was inherited from NumPy.
So NumPy is very array oriented, vector oriented.
So you rather than write a for loop, you would write an array expression, which would operate
on whole batches of data in a single function call, which is a lot faster because you can
drop down into C code and get good performance that way.
And so Pandas adopted the NumPy way of like the NumPy like array expression or vector
operations.
And I'm curious to hear that that's extended to the types of like non-numeric data operations
that you can do in Pandas, like, you know, vectorized set lookups, where you can say
like, you would say like, oh, like this, I have this array of strings, and I have this
subset of strings, and I want to compute a Boolean array, which says whether or not each
string is contained in this set of strings.
And so in Pandas, that's the is in function.
So you would say like, column A, like is in some set of substrings, and that produces
that single function call produces a whole Boolean array that you can use for subsetting
later on.
Yeah, there's a ton of things that are really interesting in there.
One of the challenges, maybe you could speak to this a little bit, then I want to come
back to your performance comment.
One of the challenges I think is that some of these operations are not super obvious
that they exist or that they're discoverable, right?
Like instead of just indexing into say a column, you can index on an expression that might
filter out the columns or project them or things like that.
How do you recommend people like kind of discover a little bigger breadth of what they can do?
There's plenty of great books written about Pandas.
So there's my book, Python for Data Analysis.
I think Matt Harrison has written an excellent book, Effective Pandas.
Pandas documentation, I think has provides really nitty gritty detail about how all the
different things work.
But when I was writing my this book, Python for Data Analysis, my goal was to, you know,
create a primer, like a tutorial on how to solve data problems with Pandas.
And so for that, you know, I had to introduce some basics of how NumPy works so people could
understand array oriented computing, basics of Python, so you know enough Python to be
able to understand what things that Pandas is doing.
It builds incrementally.
And so like, as you go through the book, the content gets more and more advanced.
It introduces, you learn, you master initial set of techniques, and then you can start
learning about more advanced techniques.
So it's definitely a pedagogical resource.
And it is now freely as you as you're showing there on the screen, it is freely available
on the internet.
So JJ Allaire helped me port the book to use Quarto, which is a new technical publishing
system for writing books and blogs and website, you know, quarto.org.
And yes, that's how I was able to publish my book on the internet, as you know, essentially,
you can use Quarto to write books using Jupyter notebooks, which is cool.
My book was written a long time ago in O'Reilly's DocBook XML.
So not particularly fun to edit.
But yeah, because Quarto is built on Pandoc, which is a sort of markup language transpilation
system.
So you can use Pandoc to convert from one, you know, you can to convert documents from
one format to another.
And so that's the kind of the root framework that Quarto is built on for, you know, generating
starting with one document format and generating many different types of output formats.
That's cool.
I didn't realize your book was available just to read on the internet.
If you navigate around.
In the third edition, I was able to negotiate with O'Reilly and add a, you know, add an
append and make an amendment to my very old book contract from 2011 to let me release
the book for free on my website.
So it's yeah, it's just available there at westmckinney.com/book.
I find that like a lot of people really like the print book.
And so I think that having the online book just available, like whenever you are somewhere
and you want to look something up is great.
Print books are hard to search.
Yeah, that's true.
That's true.
Yeah.
And like, if you go to the search bar, and if you go back to the book and just look at
the search bar, you know, look at just search for like group by like, you know, all one
word or you know, yeah, it's like, it comes up really fast.
You can go to that section.
And it's pretty cool.
I thought that releasing the book for free online would would affect sales, but people
just really like having paper books, it seems even in 2024.
Yeah, even digital books are nice.
You got them with you all the time you can I think it's about taking the notes, where
do I put my highlights?
And how do I remember it?
And that's right.
Yeah, yeah, stuff like that.
This quarter thing looks super interesting.
If you look at Pandoc, if people haven't looked at this before, the conversion matrix.
I don't know how you would how would you describe this was busy and complete?
What is this?
This is crazy.
It's very busy.
Yeah, it's it's it can convert from looks like about, you know, 30 or 40 input formats,
formats to, you know, 50 or 60 output formats, maybe maybe more than that, kind of just my
just eyeballing it.
But yeah, it's like a pretty, pretty impressive.
And then if you took the combinatorial of like, how many different ways could you combine
the 30 to the 50?
It's kind of what it looks like.
It's right.
It's truly amazing.
So you've got Markdown, you want to turn it into a PDF, or you've got a Doku wiki and
you want to turn it into an EPUB or whatever, right?
Or even like reveal JS, probably to PowerPoint, I would imagine.
I don't know.
Yeah.
As history like backstory about about quarto.
So you know, it helps to keep in mind that that JJ created cold fusion, which was this,
you know, essentially publishing system, early publishing system for the internet, similar
to CGI and, and PHP and another dynamic web publishing systems.
And so at early on it at our studio, they created our Markdown, which is a basically
a extensions to Markdown that allow you to have code cells written in, in our and then
eventually they added support for some other languages where it's kind of like a Jupiter
notebook in the sense that you could have some Markdown and some code and some plots
and output, and you would run the arm Markdown render and it would it would, it would, you
know, generate all the output and insert it into the document.
And so you could use that to write blogs and websites and everything.
But but our markdown was written in our and so that limited in a sense, like it made it
harder to install because you would have to install our to use it.
And also people, it had an association with our that perhaps was like, like unmerited.
And so in the meantime, you know, with all everything that's happened with web technology,
it's now very easy to put a complete JavaScript engine in a stall footprint, you know, on
a machine with no dependencies, and to be able to run a system that is, you know, written
in a system that's written in JavaScript.
And so Cordo is completely language agnostic, it's written in TypeScript, and uses Pandoc
as an as an underlying engine.
And it's very easy to install.
And so it addresses some of the portability and extensibility issues that were that were
present in our Markdown.
But but as a result, you know, I think our the the Posit team had a lot of just has more
than a, you know, a decade, or if you include cold fusion, you know, more than 25 years
of experience and in building really developer friendly technical publishing tools.
And so I think that that it's not data science, but it's something that is an important part
of the data science workflow, which is, how do you present your make your analysis and
your work available for consumption in different formats.
And so having this this system that can, you know, publish outputs in in many different
places is super valuable.
So a lot of people start out in Jupyter notebooks, but but there's many different, you know,
many different possible input formats.
And so to be able to, you know, use the same source to publish to a website or to a confluence
page or to a PDF is like, super valuable.
Yeah, it's super interesting.
Okay, so then I got to explore some more.
Let's go back to this for a minute.
Just how about some kind words from the audience for you?
Ravid says, Wes, your work has changed my life.
It's very, very nice.
I'm happy to hear it.
But yeah, yeah, I'm more than happy to talk.
Let's talk in depth about pandas.
And I think history of the project is interesting.
And I think also how the project has has developed in the intervening 1516 years is pretty interesting
as well.
Yeah, let's talk derivatives for a minute.
So growth and speed of adoption and all those things.
When you first started working on this, and you first put it out, did you foresee a world
where this was so popular and so important?
Did you think of Yeah, pretty soon black holes, I'm pretty sure I'll be part of that somehow.
It was always the aspiration of making Python this mainstream language for statistical computing
and data analysis.
Like I didn't, it didn't occur to me that it would become this popular or that it would
become like the one of the main tools that people use for working with data in a business
in a business setting like that would have been if that was the aspiration, or if that
was, you know, what I needed to achieve to be satisfied, that that would have been completely
unreasonable.
And I also don't think that in a certain sense, like, I don't know that that it's popularity,
it is deserved, and it's not deserved.
Like I think there's there's many other worthy efforts that have been created over the years
that have been really great work that that others have have done in this this domain.
And so the fact that that pandas caught on and became as popular as it is, I think it's
a combination of timing.
And you know, there was like a developer relations aspect that there was content available.
And like I wrote my book, and that made it easier for people to learn how to use the
project.
But also like we we had a serendipitous open source developer community that that came
together that allowed the project to grow and expand like really rapidly in the early
2010s.
And I definitely spent a lot of work like recruiting people to work on the project and
encouraging you know, others to work on it, because sometimes people create open source
projects, and then it's hard for hard for others to get involved and get a seat at the
table, so to speak.
But I was very keen to bring on others and to give them responsibility and you know,
ultimately, you know, hand over the reins to the project to others.
And that I've spoken a lot about that, you know, over the years, how important that is
to you know, for open source project creators to to make room for others in, you know, steering
and growing the project so that they can become owners of it as well.
It's tough to make space and tough to bring on folks.
Have you heard of the Djangonauts?
The Djangonauts?
I think it's Djangonauts dot space.
They have an awesome domain.
But it's basically like kind of like a boot camp, but it's for taking people who just
like Django and turn them into actually contributors or core contributors.
What's your onboarding story for people who do want to participate?
I'm embarrassed to say that I'm not, I don't have a comprehensive view of like all of the
different, you know, community outreach channels that the pandas project has done to help grow
new contributors.
So one of the core team members, Mark Garcia, has done an amazing job organizing documentation
sprints and other like contributor sourcing events, essentially creating very friendly,
accessible events where people who are interested in getting involved in pandas can meet each
other and then assist each other in making their first pull request.
And it could be something as simple as, you know, making a small improvement to the to
the pandas documentation because it's such a large project.
The documentation is like always something that could be better, you know, either adding
more adding more examples or documenting things that aren't documented or making, yeah, just
just making the documentation better.
And so it's something that for new contributors is more accessible than working on the internals
of like one of the algorithms or something.
And, and, or like we working on some significant performance improvement might be a bit intimidating
if you've never worked on the pandas code base.
And it's a pretty large code base because it's been it's been worked on continuously
for you know, for like going on 20 years.
So it's, yeah, it can be takes a while to really get to a place where you can be productive.
And that can be discouraging for new contributors, especially those who don't have a lot of open
source experience.
That's one of the ironies of the challenges of these big projects is they're just so finely
polished.
So many people are using them.
Every edge case matters to somebody.
Right.
And so to become a contributor and make changes to that, it takes a while, I'm sure.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, I think it's definitely a big thing that helped is allowing people to get paid
to work on pandas or to be able to contribute to pandas as, as a part of their job description,
like as you know, maybe part of their job is maintaining, maintaining pandas.
So Anaconda, you know, was like, you know, one of the earliest companies who had engineers
on staff, you know, like, you know, Brock Mendel, Tom Augsberger, Jeff Reback, who part
of their job was maintaining and developing, developing pandas.
And that was, that was huge because prior to that, the project was purely based on volunteers.
Like I, I was a volunteer and everyone was working on the project as a, as a passion
project in their, in their free time.
And then Travis Oliphant, one of the founders, he and Peter Wang founded Anaconda.
Travis spun out from Anaconda to create Quonsight and has continued to sponsor development in
and around pandas.
And that's enabled people like Mark to do these community building events and, and for
it to not be, you know, something that's, you know, totally uncompensated.
Yeah.
That's a lot of, a lot of stuff going on.
And I think the interest is awesome, right?
I mean, if it was just a different level of problems, I feel like we could take on, you
know, you know what, I got this entire week and someone that's my job is to make this
work rather than I've, I've got two hours and can't really take on a huge project.
And so I'll work on the smaller improvements or whatever.
Yeah.
Many people know, but I, I haven't been involved day to day in pandas since 2013.
So that's, that's getting on.
That's a lot of years.
I still talk to the pandas contributors.
We had a, we had a pandas meetup core, core developer meetup here in Nashville pre COVID.
I think it was in 2019, maybe.
So I'm still in active contact with the pandas developers, but it's been a different team
of people leading the project.
It's taken on a life of its own, which is, which is amazing.
That's exactly, yeah.
As a project creator, that's exactly what you want is to not be beholden to the project
that you created and forced and, you know, kind of have to be, be responsible for it
and take care of it for the rest of your life.
But if you look at like a lot of the community, a lot of the most kind of intensive community
development has happened since, like, since I moved on to work on, on other projects.
And so now the project has, I don't know the exact count, but 10 thousands of contributors.
And so, you know, to have thousands of different unique individuals contributing to an open
source project is a, it's a big deal.
So I think even, I don't know what it says on the bottom of GitHub, it says, you know,
3,200 contributors, but that's maybe not even the full story because sometimes, you know,
people, they don't have their email address associated with their GitHub profile and, you
know, how GitHub counts contributors.
I would say probably the true number is closer to 4,000.
That's a testament, you know, to the, to the core team and all the outreach that they've
done and work making, making the project accessible and easy to contribute to.
Because if people, if you go and try to make a pull request to a project and there's many
different ways that you can fail.
So like either the project is technically like there's issues with the build system
or the developer tooling.
And so you struggle with the developer tooling.
And so if you aren't working on it every day and every night, you can't make heads or tails
of how the developer tools work.
But then there's also like the level of accessibility of the core development team.
Like if they don't, if they aren't there to support you in getting involved in the project
and learning how it works and creating documentation about how to contribute and what's expected
of you, that can also be, you know, a source of frustration where people churn out of the
project, you know, because it's just, it's too hard to find their sea legs.
And maybe also, you know, sometimes development teams are unfriendly or unhelpful or, you
know, they make, they make others feel like they make others feel like they're annoyed
with them or like they're wasting their time or something.
It's like, I don't want to look at your, you know, this pull request and give you feedback
because you know, I could do it more quickly by myself or something.
Like sometimes you see that an open source projects.
But they've created a very welcoming environment.
And yeah, I think the contribution numbers speak for themselves.
- They definitely do.
Maybe the last thing before we move on to the other stuff you're working on, but the
other interesting GitHub statistic here is the used by 1.6 million projects.
That's, I don't know if I've ever seen it used by that high.
There's probably some that are higher, but not many.
- Yeah, it's a lot of projects.
I think it's, it's interesting.
I think like many projects, it's reached a point where it's, it's an essential and assumed
part of the, of many people's toolkit.
Like they, like the first thing that they write at the top of a file that they're working
on is import pandas as PD or import NumPy as PD, you know, to create, I think in a sense,
like I think one of the reasons why, you know, pandas has gotten so popular is that it is
beneficial to the community, to the Python community to have fewer solutions, you know,
kind of the Zen of Python, there should be one and preferably only one obvious, obvious
way to do things.
And so if there were 10 different pandas like projects, you know, that creates skill portability
problems and it's just easier if everyone says, oh, we just, pandas is the thing that
we use and you change jobs and you can take all your skills, like how to use pandas with
you.
And I think that's also one of the reasons why Python has become so successful in the
business world is because you can teach somebody even without a lot of programming experience,
how to use Python, how to use pandas and become productive doing basic work very, very quickly.
And so one of the solutions I remember back in the early 2010s, there were a lot of articles
and talks about how to address the data science shortage.
And my belief and I gave a talk at Web Summit in Dublin in 2000, gosh, maybe 2017, I have
to look exactly.
But basically it was the data scientist shortage.
And my thesis was always, we should make it easier to be a data scientist or like lower
the bar for like what sort of skills you have to master before you can do productive work
in a business setting.
And so I think the fact that there is just pandas and that's like the one thing that
people have to learn how to use is like their essential starting point for doing any data
work has also led to this piling on of like people being motivated to make this one thing
better because you make improvements to pandas and they benefit millions of projects and
millions of people around the world.
And that's, yeah, so it's like a steady snowballing effect.
This portion of Talk Python to Me is brought to you by Mailtrap, an email delivery platform
that developers love.
An email sending solution with industry best analytics, SMTP and email API SDKs for major
programming languages and 24/7 human support.
Try for free at mailtrap.io.
I think doing data science is getting easier.
We've got a lot of interesting frameworks and tools.
Shiny for Python, one of them, right, that makes it easier to share and run your code,
you know?
Yeah, Shiny for Python, Streamlit, Dash, like these different interactive data application
publishing frameworks.
So you can go from a few lines of pandas code, loading some data and doing some analysis
and visualization to publishing that as an interactive website without having to know
how to use any web development frameworks or Node.js or anything like that.
And so to be able to get up and running and build a working interactive web application
that's powered by Python is, yeah, it's a game changer in terms of shortening end-to-end
development life cycles.
What do you think about JupyterLite and these PyOxidized and basically Jupyter in a browser
type of things, WebAssembly and all that?
Yeah, so I'm definitely very excited about it, been following WebAssembly in general.
And so I guess some people listening will know about WebAssembly, but basically it's
a portable machine code that can be compiled and executed within your browser in a sandbox
environment.
So it protects against security issues and allows, prevents like the person who wrote
the WebAssembly code from doing something malicious on your machine, which is very important.
Won't necessarily stop them from like, you know, mining cryptocurrency while you have
the browser tab open.
That's a whole separate problem.
And it's enabled us to run the whole scientific Python stack, including Jupyter and NumPy
and Pandas totally in the browser without having a client and server and needing to
run a container someplace in the cloud.
And so I think in terms of creating application deployment, so like being able to deploy an
interactive data application like with Shiny, for example, without needing to have a server,
that's actually pretty amazing.
And so I think that simplifies, opens up new use cases, like new application architectures
and make that makes things a lot easier for, because setting up and running a server creates
brittleness, like it has cost.
And so if the browser is doubling as your server process, like that's, I think that's
really cool.
You also have like other projects like DuckDB, which is a high performance, embeddable analytic
SQL engine.
And so now with DuckDB compiled to Wasm, you can get a high performance database running
in your browser.
And so you can get low latency, interactive queries and interactive dashboards.
And so it's, yeah, there's WebAssembly has opened up this whole kind of new world of
possibilities and it's transformative, I think.
For Python in particular, you mentioned Pyodide, which is kind of a whole packaged stack.
So it's like a framework for build and build and packaging and basically building an application
and managing its dependencies.
So you could create a WebAssembly version of your application to be deployed like this.
But yeah, so I think one of the Pyodide, either the Pyodide main creator or maintainer went
to Anaconda, they created PyScript, which made, which is another attempt to make it
even easier to use Python to make it even easier to use Python to create web applications,
interactive web applications.
There's so many cool things here, like in the R community, they have WebR, which is
similar to PyScript and Pyodide in some ways, like compiling the whole R stack to WebAssembly.
There was just an article I saw on Hacker News where they worked on figuring out how
to get, how to trick LLVM into compiling Fortran code, like legacy Fortran code to WebAssembly.
Because when you're talking about all of this scientific computing stack, you need the linear
algebra and all of the 40 years of Fortran code that have been built to support scientific
applications.
And you can compile to and run in the browser.
So yeah, that's pretty wild to think of putting that in there, but very useful.
I didn't realize that you could use DuckDB as a WebAssembly component.
That's pretty cool.
Yeah, there's a company, I'm not an investor or plugging them or anything, but it's called
evidence.dev.
It's like a whole like business intelligence, open source business intelligence application
that's powered by, powered by DuckDB.
And so if you have data that fits in the browser, you know, to have a whole like interactive
dashboard or to be able to do business intelligence, like fully, like fully in the browser with
no need of a, no need of a server.
It's yeah, it's, it's very, very cool.
So I've been following DuckDB since the, you know, since the early days and you know, my
company Voltron Data, like we became members of the DuckDB foundation and built an actively
built a relationship with, with DuckDB labs.
So we could help accelerate progress in this space because I think the impact, the impact
is so is so immense and we just, it's hard to predict like what you know, what people
are going to build, build with all this stuff.
And so that was all, you know, with, I guess going back, you know, 15 years ago to Python,
like one of the reasons I became so passionate about building stuff for Python was about
in I think the way that Peter Wang puts that, it puts it as, you know, giving people superpowers.
So we want to enable people to build things with much less code and much less time.
And so by making it things that much more accessible, that much easier to do, like the
mantra in pandas was like, how do we make things one line of code?
Or like this, that must be easy.
It's like one line of code, one line of code.
It must be like, like make this as terse and simple and easy to do as possible so that
you can move on and focus on building the more interesting parts of your application
rather than struggling with how to read a CSV file or you know, how to do whichever
data munging technique that you need for your, for your data set.
- That would be an interesting mental model for DuckDB.
It's kind of an equivalent to SQLite, but more analytics database for folks, you know,
in process and that kind of things, right?
What do you think?
- Yeah, so yeah, DuckDB is like SQLite.
And in fact, it can run the whole SQLite test suite, I believe.
So it's a full database, but it's for analytic processing.
So it's optimized for analytic processing and as compared, you know, with SQLite, which
is not for data processing.
- Yeah, cool.
All right, well, let's talk about some things that you're working on beyond pandas.
You talked about Apache Arrow earlier.
What are you doing with Arrow and how's it fit in your world?
- The backstory there was, I don't know if you can hear the sirens in downtown Nashville,
but.
- No, actually, I don't hear the sirens.
- It's good, the microphone filters it out, filters it out pretty well.
- Yay for dynamic microphones, they're amazing.
- Yeah, so in like around the mid, like the mid 2010s, 2015, I started working at Cloudera,
like in the, which is a company that was like one of the pioneers in the big data ecosystem.
And I had been spent several years working on five, five years, five, six years working
on pandas.
And so I'd gone through the experience of building pandas from top to bottom.
And it was this full stack system that had had its own, you know, mini query engine,
all of its own algorithms and data structures and all this stuff that we had to build from
scratch.
And I started thinking about, you know, what if it was possible to build some of the underlying
computing technology, like data readers, like file readers, all the algorithms that power
the core components of pandas, like group operations, aggregations, filtering, selection,
all those things.
Like what if it were possible to have a general purpose library that isn't specific to Python,
isn't specific to pandas, but is really, really fast, really efficient, and has a large community
building, building it so that you could take that code with you and use it to build many
different types of libraries, not just data frame libraries, but also database engines
and stream processing engines and all kinds of things.
That was kind of what was in my mind when I started getting interested in what turned
into turn into arrow.
And one of the problems we realized we needed to solve this was like a group of other open
source developers and me was that we needed to create a way to represent data that was
not tied to a specific programming language.
And that could be used for a very efficient interchange between components.
And the idea is that you would have this immutable, this kind of constant data structure, which
is like it's the same in every programming language.
And then you can use that as the basis for writing all of your algorithms.
So as long as it's arrow, you have these reusable algorithms that process arrow data.
So we started with building the arrow format and standardizing it.
And then we've built a whole ecosystem of components like library components and different
programming languages for building applications that use the arrow format.
So that includes not only tools for building and interacting with the data, but also file
readers.
So you can read CSV files and JSON data and parquet files, read data out of database systems,
you know, wherever the data comes from, we want to have an efficient way to get it into
the arrow format.
And then we moved on to building data processing engines that are native to the arrow format,
so that arrow goes in, the data is processed, arrow goes out.
So DuckDB, for example, supports arrow as a preferred input format.
And is DuckDB is more or less arrow like in its internals, it has kind of arrow format
plus a number of extensions that are DuckDB specific for better performance within the
context of DuckDB.
So in numerous communities, so there's the Rust community, which has built Data Fusion,
which is an execution engine for arrow, SQL engine for arrow.
And so yeah, we've kind of like looked at the different layers of the stack, like data
access, computing, data transport, everything under the sun.
And then we've built libraries that are across many different programming languages so that
are you can pick and choose the pieces that you need to build your build your system.
And the goal ultimately, was that we in the future, which is now, we don't want people
to have to reinvent the wheel whenever they're building something like pandas that they could
just pick up these off the shelf components, they can design the developer experience,
the user experience that they want to create, and they can get build, you know, so if you
were building pandas, now you could build a pandas like library based on the arrow components
in much less time, and it would be fast and efficient and interoperable with the whole
ecosystem of other projects that use arrow.
It's very cool.
It's I mean, it was really ambitious, in some ways, obvious to people, they would they would
hear about arrow and they say that sounds obvious, like, clearly, we should have a universal
way of transporting data between systems and processing it in memory.
Why hasn't this been done in the past?
And it turns out that, as is true with many open source software problems that many of
these problems are, the social problems are harder than the technical problems.
And so if you can solve the people coordination and consensus problems, solving the technical
issues is much, much easier by comparison.
So I think we were lucky in that we found like the right group of people, the right
personalities where we were able to, as soon as I met, I met Jacques Nadeau, who had been
at MapR and we was working on his startup Dremio.
Like I knew instantly when I met Jacques Nadeau, I was like, I can work he's like, he's like
him like he's gonna help me make this happen.
And I met Julien Ledem, who had also co created Parquet.
I was like, yes, like, we were gonna make like I found the right people like we're we're
gonna make this happen.
It's been a labor of love and much, much work and stress and everything.
But I've been working on things circling, you know, with arrows, the sun, you know,
I've been building kind of satellites and moons and planets circling the arrow sun over
the last eight years or so.
And that's kept me pretty busy.
Yeah, it's only getting more exciting and interesting.
Over here, it says it uses efficient analytic operations on modern hardware like CPUs and
GPUs.
One of the big challenges of Python has been the gill also one of its big benefits, but
one of its challenges when you get to multi core computational stuff has been the gill.
What's the story here?
Yeah.
So in Arrowland, when we're talking about analytic efficiency, it mainly has to do with
the like underlying like how the how modern CPU works or how a GPU works.
And so when the data is arranged in column oriented format, that enables the data to
be moved efficiently through the CPU cache pipelines.
So the data is made made available efficiently to the to the CPU cores.
And so we spent a lot of energy in Arrow making decisions firstly, to enable very cache of
like CPU cache or GPU cache efficient analytics on the data.
So we were kind of always when we were deciding we would break ties and make decisions based
on like what's going to be more efficient for the for the computer chip.
The other thing is that modern and this is true with GPUs, which have a different parallelism
model than or different kind of multi core parallelism model than CPUs.
But in CPUs, they've focused on adding what are called single instruction, multiple data
intrinsic, like built in operations in the processor, where you know, now you can process
up to 512 bytes of data in a single CPU instruction.
And so that's like my brain's doing the math right, like 1632 bit floats, or, you know,
eight 64 bit integers in a single CPU cycle.
There's like intrinsic operations.
So multiply this number by that one, multiply that number to these eight things all at once,
something like that.
That's right.
Yeah.
Or you might say like, oh, I have a bit mask and I want to select I want to gather like
the one bits that are set in this bit mask from this array of integers.
And so there's like a gather instruction, which allows you to select a subset sort of
SIMD vector of integers, you know, using a bit mask.
And so that turns out to be like a pretty critical operation in certain data analytic
workloads.
So yeah, we were really, we wanted to have a data format that was essentially, you know,
future proofed in the sense that it's, it's ideal for the coming wave, like current current
generation of CPUs, but also given that a lot of processing is moving to GPUs and to
FPGAs and to custom silicon, like we wanted Arrow to be usable there as well.
And it's Arrow has been successfully, you know, used as the foundation of GPU computing
libraries.
Like we kind of at Voltron Data, we built, we've built a whole accelerator native GPU
native, you know, scalable execution engine that's, that's Arrow based.
And so I think the fact that we, that was our aspiration and we've been able to prove
that out in real world workloads and show the kinds of efficiency gains that you can
get with using modern computing hardware correctly, or at least as well as it's intended to be
used.
That's a big deal in terms of like making applications faster, reducing the carbon footprint
of large scale data workloads, things like that.
Yeah.
Amazing.
All right.
Let's see what else have I got on deck here to talk to you about.
Do Ibis, want to talk about Ibis or which one you want to, we got a little time left.
We got a couple of things to cover.
Yeah.
Let's, we can talk about Ibis.
We could, we could probably spend another hour talking.
Yes.
Easy.
So one of the more interesting areas in recent years has been new DataFrame libraries and
DataFrame APIs that transpile or compile to different execute on different backends.
And so around the time that I was helping start Arrow, I created this project called
Ibis, which is basically a portable DataFrame API that knows how to generate SQL queries
and compile to pandas and pollers and different DataFrame, DataFrame backends.
And the goal is to provide a really productive DataFrame API that gives you portability across
different execution backends with the goal of enabling what we call the multi-engine
data stack.
So you aren't stuck with using one particular system because all of the code that you've
written is specialized to that system.
You have this tool, which, so maybe you could work with, you know, DuckDB on your laptop
or pandas or pollers with Ibis on your laptop.
But if you have, if you need to run that workload someplace else, maybe with, you know, ClickHouse
or BigQuery, or maybe it's a large big data workload that's too big to fit on your laptop
and you need to use Spark SQL or something that you can just ask Ibis, say, "Hey, I want
to do the same thing on this larger dataset over here."
And it has all the logic to generate the correct query representation and run that workload
for you.
So it's super useful.
But there's a whole wave of like, you know, work right now to help enable people to work
in a pandas-like way, but get work with big data or, you know, get better performance
than pandas because pandas is a Swiss army knife, but isn't a chainsaw.
So if you were rebuilding pandas from scratch, it would end up a lot.
There's areas of the projects that are, you know, more bloated or have performance overhead
that's hard to get rid of.
And so that's why you have Richie Fink started the Pollers project, which is kind of a reimagining
of pandas, pandas data frames written in Rust and exposed in Python.
And Pollers, of course, is built on Apache Arrow at its core.
So building an Arrow native data frame library in Rust and, you know, all the benefits that
come with building Python extensions in Rust, you know, you avoid the gill and you can manage
the multithreading in a systems language, all that fun stuff.
Yeah.
When you're talking about Arrow and supporting different ways of using it and things being
built on it, certainly Pollers came to mind for me.
You know, when you talk about Ibis, I think it's interesting that a lot of these data
frame libraries, they try to base their API to be pandas-like, but not identical, potentially,
you know, thinking of Dask and others.
But this Ibis sort of has the ability to configure it and extend it and make it different, kind
of like, for example, Dask, which is one of the backends here.
But the API doesn't change, right?
It just, it talks to the different backends.
Yeah.
There's different schools of thought on this.
So there's another project called Modin, which is similar to Ibis in many ways, in the sense
of like transpilation and sort of dynamically supporting different backends, but sought
to closely emulate the exact details of like the API call, the function name, the function
arguments must be exactly the same as pandas, with the goal of being a drop-in replacement
for people's pandas code.
And that's one approach, kind of the pandas emulation route.
And there's a library called Koalas for Spark, which is like a PySpark emulation layer for
the pandas API.
And then there's other projects like Polars and Ibis, Dask DataFrame, that take like design
cues from pandas in the sense of like the general way in which the API works, but has
made meaningful departures in the interest of doing things better in many ways than pandas
did in certain parts of the API, and making things simpler, and not being beholden to
decisions that were made in pandas, you know, 15 years ago.
Not to say there's anything bad about the pandas API, but like with any API, it's large,
like it's very large as evidenced by, you know, the 2000 pages of documentation.
And so I understand the desire to make things simpler, but also refining certain things,
making certain types of workloads easier to express.
And so Polars, for example, is very expression based.
And so everything is column expressions and is lazy, and not eagerly computed, whereas
pandas is eager execution, just like NumPy is, which is how pandas became eagerly executed
in the first place.
And so I think the mantra with Polars was, we don't want to support the eager execution
by default that pandas provides, we want to be able to build expressions so that we can
do query optimization, and take inefficient code and under the hood, rewrite it to be
more efficient, which is, you know, what you can do with a query optimizer.
And so ultimately, like, that matters a lot when you're executing code remotely, or in
like a big data system, you want to have the freedom to be able to take like a lazy analytic
expression and rewrite it based on it might be like you need to seriously rewrite the
expression in the case of like, Dask, for example, like Dask has to do planning across
a distributed cluster.
And so, you know, Dask DataFrame is very pandas like, but it also includes some explicit details
of being able to control how the data is partitioned and being able to have some knobs to turn
in terms of like, having more control over what's happening on a distributed cluster.
And I think the goal there is like to give the developer more control as opposed to like
trying to be intelligent, you know, make all of the decisions on behalf of the developer.
So you know, if you know about how you know, know a lot about your data set, then you can
make more you can make a, you know, decisions about how to how to schedule and execute it.
Of course, that Dask is building query, you know, query optimization to start making more
of those decisions on behalf of the user.
But you know, Dask has become very popular and impactful and making distributed computing
easier in Python.
So they've gotten, I think, got a long way without turning into a database.
And I think Dask never aspired to be a to be a database engine, which is a lot of distributed
computing is, you know, not database like it's could be distributed array computing
or distributed model training, and just being able to easily run distributed Python functions
on a cluster do distributed computing that way.
It was amazing, like how many people were using PySpark in the early days, just for
the convenience of being able to run Python functions in parallel on a cluster.
Yeah, and that's pretty interesting.
Not exactly what it's designed for, right?
Dask, you know, you probably come across situations where you do a sequence of operations, they're
kind of commutative in the end and practice, but from a computational perspective, like
how do I distribute this amongst different servers, maybe one order matters a lot more
than the other outperformance, you know?
Yeah, yeah.
Interesting.
All right.
One final thing.
SQLGLOT.
Yeah.
So SQLGLOT project started by Toby Mao.
So he's a Netflix alum and really, really talented, talented developer who's created
this SQL query transpilation framework library for Python and kind of underlying core library.
And so the problem that's being solved there is that SQL, despite being a quote unquote
standard is not at all standardized across different database systems.
And so if you want to take your SQL queries written for one engine and use them someplace
else, without something like SQLGLOT, you would have to manually rewrite and make sure
you get the typecasting and coalescing rules correct.
And so SQLGLOT understands the intricacies and the quirks of every database dialect,
SQL dialect, and knows how to correctly translate from one dialect to another.
And so IBIS now uses SQLGLOT as its underlying engine for query transpilation and generating
SQL outputs.
So originally, IBIS had its own kind of bad version of SQLGLOT, kind of a query transpilation,
like SQL transpilation that was powered by, I think, powered by SQLAlchemy and a bunch
of custom code.
And so I think they've been able to delete a lot of code in IBIS by moving to SQLGLOT.
And I know that, you know, SQLGLOT is also being used to power kind of a new, yeah, being
used in people building new products that are Python powered and things like that.
So Toby, like his company, Tobiko Data, they're building a product called SQL Mesh that's
powered by SQLGLOT.
So very cool project and maybe a bit in the weeds, but if you've ever needed to convert
a SQL query from one dialect to another, it's, yeah, SQLGLOT is here to save the day.
I would say, you know, even simple things is how do you specify a parameter variable,
you know, for parameterized query, right?
And Microsoft SQL Server, it's like at the parameter name and Oracle, it's like question
mark or SQL, I think it's also quite, you know, just that, even those simple things.
It's a pain.
And without it, you end up with little Bobby tables, which is also not good.
So that's true.
That's true.
Nobody wants to talk to him.
Yeah, this is really cool.
SQLGLOT, like polyglot, but all the languages of SQL.
Nice.
And you do things like you can say, read DuckDB and write to Hive or read DuckDB and then
write to Spark or whatever.
It's pretty cool.
All right, Wes, I think we're getting short on time, but you know, I know everybody appreciated
hearing from you and hearing what you're up to these days.
Anything you want to add before we wrap up?
I don't think so.
Yeah.
I enjoyed the conversation and yeah, there's a lot of stuff going on and still plenty of
things to get excited about.
So I think often people feel like all the exciting problems in the Python ecosystem
have been solved, but there's still a lot to do.
And yeah, we've made a lot of progress in the last 15 plus years, but in some ways it
feels like we're just getting started.
So we are just excited to see where things go next.
Yeah.
Every time I think, oh, all the problems are solved, then you discover all these new things
that are so creative and you're like, oh, well, that was a big problem.
I didn't even know it was a problem.
It's great.
All right.
Well, thanks for being here and taking the time and keep us updated on what you're up
to.
All right.
Thanks for joining us.
Bye-bye.
This has been another episode of Talk Python to Me.
Thank you to our sponsors.
Be sure to check out what they're offering.
It really helps support the show.
It's time to stop asking relational databases to do more than they were made for and simplify
complex data models with graphs.
Check out the sample FastAPI project and see what Neo4j, a native graph database, can do
for you.
You can find out more at talkpython.fm/neo4j.
Mailtrap, an email delivery platform that developers love.
Try for free at mailtrap.io.
Want to level up your Python?
We have one of the largest catalogs of Python video courses over at Talk Python.
Our content ranges from true beginners to deeply advanced topics like memory and async.
And best of all, there's not a subscription in sight.
Check it out for yourself at training.talkpython.fm.
Be sure to subscribe to the show.
Open your favorite podcast app and search for Python.
We should be right at the top.
You can also find the iTunes feed at /iTunes, the Google Play feed at /play, and the Direct
RSS feed at /rss on talkpython.fm.
We're live streaming most of our recordings these days.
If you want to be part of the show and have your comments featured on the air, be sure
to subscribe to our YouTube channel at talkpython.fm/youtube.
This is your host, Michael Kennedy.
Thanks so much for listening.
I really appreciate it.
Now get out there and write some Python code.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[END PLAYBACK]